---
layout:     post
title:      Notes for EECS370 Mid
subtitle:   FA2020 EECS370 @Umich
date:       2020-10-20
author:     JIM
header-img: img/post-bg-coffee.jpg
catalog: true
tags:
    - EECS370
    - CTPP

---

### Useful Link

* [ARMv8 (LEG) Cheat Sheet](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1ysv_I8FjC00oIY_Td9UbgCzsQwdlpPzQ)
* [Binary Calculator](https://www.rapidtables.com/calc/math/binary-calculator.html)
* [Bin-Dec-Conversion(2'comp)](https://ncalculators.com/digital-computation/binary-decimal-converter.htm)
* [LC2K Cheat Sheet](https://www.eecs.umich.edu/courses/eecs370/eecs370.f20/projects/p1_spec/#32-description-of-machine-instructions)

### Runtime Memory

##### Stack

 starts at 0x0000 007F FFFF FFFC and grows down to lower addresses. Bottom of the stack resides in the SP register

##### Heap

starts above static data and grows up to higher addresses. Allocation done explicitly with malloc(). Deallocation with free(). Runtime error if no free memory before running into SP address. NB not same as data structure heap—just uninitialized mem.

##### Static

starts above text. Holds all global variables and those locals explicitly declared as “static”.

##### Text

starts at 0x0000 0000 0004 0000. Holds all instructions in the program (except for dynamically linked library routines, DLLs)

### Single Cycle Timing

|  Inst   | get Inst (read Mem) | read Reg | ALU Op | read Mem (beside get inst) | write Mem | write Reg |
| :-----: | :-----------------: | :------: | :----: | :------------------------: | :-------: | :-------: |
| add/nor |          √          |    √     |   √    |                            |           |     √     |
|   beq   |          √          |    √     |   √    |                            |           |           |
|   sw    |          √          |    √     |   √    |                            |     √     |           |
|   lw    |          √          |    √     |   √    |             √              |           |     √     |

* "get Instruction" is essentially read memory once


### Symbol Table

* ```main``` should go to the symbol table.
* global function (both declaration and implementation) should go to the symbol table.
* During the standard compilation process (e.g. when gcc is run without any ?ags), the symbol table and relocation table are not included in
  an executable.

### Relocation Table

* dereference a local pointer to a global variable does not go to the relocation table.
* read/write global variable should go to the relocation table
* [LC2K] lw/sw/.fill will go to the relocation table
* The number of entries in a symbol table is **not** necessarily >/=/< to the number of entries in the corresponding relocation table.
* No information about a variable's values during runtime is needed to build the symbol and relocation table.

### Multicycle Datapath

1. Fetch instruction
   1. IR = new Instruction
   2. ALU Result = PC+1
2. Decode instruction
   1. Read Reg
   2. PC++
3. ... (Determine the *Enable* signals first)

### Terminology

##### PC-relative addressing

specifies the target of a branch relative to the current branch instruction

~~(rather than  the instruction after the branch instruction.)~~

##### Conditional & Unconditional branch

[LC2K] `beq` is conditional; `jalr` is unconditional

[ARM] In the ARM ISA, a conditional branch instruction looks at a single register in order to evaluate whether the branch is taken.

##### Endianness

The “endianness” of an architecture is only relevant if *the size of a register is **larger** than the amount of data stored at one memory*
*address.*

##### LEGv8

* byte-addressable
* a (small) subset of the v8 ISA